# Module 1: Introduction to Azure Cosmos DB

# Lab: Introduction to Azure Cosmos DB

### Scenario

As a member of the DevOps team in the Adventure Works company, your CTO has asked you to investigate the feasibility of moving your current NoSQL processing from an internally hosted MongoDB database, to a fully managed Azure Cosmos DB instance.

They are keen to understand the complexities of moving the data, and the tools available to protect the data once it is being hosted in Azure.

### Objectives

After completing this lab, you will be able to:
- Create an Azure Cosmos DB database with a SQL API
- Migrate data from an existing Mongo DB database to Cosmos DB
- Access data by using the SQL API
- Protect data in a Cosmos DB database

### Lab Setup

Estimated time: **45 minutes**  
Virtual machine: **20777A-LON-DEV**  
User name: **Administrator**  
Password: **Pa55w.rd**

## Exercise 1: Create an Azure Cosmos DB database with a SQL API

### Scenario

You decide that the best dataset to move into Azure is the customers data. You will use the Azure portal to creating a document database to hold information about Adventure Works customers. You have decided create the database with the SQL API, as this appears to offer the most functionality and you are more comfortable writing SQL statements than
Mongo operations.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1.  Create a document database using the Cosmos DB SQL API.
2.  Add customer documents to a collection.
3.  Perform SQL queries.
4.  Configure a documents lifetime.
5.  Replicate the Cosmos DB Account across regions.

#### Task 0: Prepare the environment

1. Ensure that the **MT17B-WS2016-NAT** and **20777A-LON-DEV** virtual machines are running, and then log on to **20777A-LON-DEV** as **Administrator** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2. In File Explorer, go to **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01**, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.
3. Wait until the script has completed, and then press Enter.

#### Task 1: Create a document database using the Cosmos DB SQL API

1.  Create a new Cosmos DB account using the SQL API.
2.  Create a new database named **SalesData**.
3.  Add a new collection named **Customers** to the **SalesData** database.
4.  Use fixed storage, with **5000** RU/s throughput. Specify **/customerid** as the unique key.

#### Task 2: Add customer documents to a collection

1.  Add the following documents to the Customers collection.

    ```JSON
    {
        "id": "1",
        "customerid": 101,
        "firstname": "Orlando",
        "lastname": "Gee",
        "email": "orlando.gee@adventure-works.com",
        "addresses": [
            { "addressline1" : "660 Lindbergh", "city" : "Saint Louis", "stateprovince" : "Missouri", "countryregion" : "United States", "postalcode" : "63103" },
            { "addressline1" : "Ontario Mills", "city" : "Ontario", "stateprovince" : "California", "countryregion" : "United States", "postalcode" : "91764" }
        ]
    }

    {
        "id": "2",
        "customerid" : 122,
        "title" : "Ms.",
        "firstname" : "Caroline",
        "middlename" : "A.",
        "lastname" : "Vicknair",
        "companyname" : "World of Bikes",
        "salesperson" : "adventure-works\\jillian0",
        "addresses": [
            { "addressline1" : "72540 Blanco Rd.", "addressline2" : "South Side", "city" : "San Antonio", "stateprovince" : "Texas", "countryregion" : "United States", "postalcode" : "78204" }
        ]
    }

    {
        "id": "3",
        "customerid": 108,
        "title" : "Mr.",
        "firstname" : "Robert",
        "middlename" : "R.",
        "lastname" : "Vessa",
        "suffix" : "Esq.",
        "companyname" : "Totes & Baskets Company",
        "salesperson" : "adventure-works\\jillian0",
        "emailaddress" : "robert13@adventure-works.com",
        "phone" : "560-555-0171"
    }
    ```

**Question**: Try and add another document with the customerid field set
to 108. What happens?

#### Task 3: Perform SQL queries

1.  Run the following queries. Note that the data is returned as an array of JSON docs:

    ```SQL
    SELECT * FROM c
    SELECT c.firstname, c.lastname, c.email FROM c
    ```

**Question**: As a document database is schema-less, what is returned in
the customers JSON document that do not have an `email` property?

```SQL
SELECT c.Customerid FROM c
```
**Question**: Why does this query return no data? (**Hint:** field names
are case sensitive)

```SQL
SELECT c.addresses FROM c
```
**Question**: Explain the format of the documents returned by this
query.

```SQL
SELECT c.customerid, c.city FROM c
```
**Question**: What might you have been expecting this query to return,
and why didn't it work?

**Question**: How would you display the customerid and city for each customer? Is this correct?

```SQL
SELECT c.customerid, c.addresses.city FROM c
```

#### Task 4: Configure a documents lifetime

1.  Use the **Scale & Settings** blade to set the Time to Live (TTL) for the Customers collection to 10 seconds.
2.  Save the changes and query the collection, note that all the previous documents have been deleted.
3.  Reset the TTL for the Customers collection to "Off".

#### Task 5: Replicate the Cosmos DB Account across regions

1.  Switch to the Replicate Data Globally blade.
2.  Add two new read regions, one close to your existing region, and the other in another continent.
3.  Use the Automatic Failover option to set the priorities of the read regions.
4.  The read region with the hightest priority (lowest number) will become the write region if the current write region fails.
5.  Select Manual Failover. Use this blade to force a failover and specify which region should become the new write region.
6.  Switch back to your default region afterwards.

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
-  Created an Azure Cosmos DB database with a SQL API.
-  Added documents to a document database.
-  Performed a number of queries against the database.
-  Configured documents Time to Live value.
-  Replicated your databases data globally.

## Exercise 2: Migrate data from an existing Mongo DB database to Cosmos DB

### Scenario

You decide that the best dataset to move into Azure is your customers data. You will use the Azure portal to creating a document database to hold information about Adventure Works customers. You have decided to create the database with the SQL API, as this offers more functionality and you are more comfortable writing SQL statements than Mongo operations.

You then copy your existing companies customer data from your MongoDB into the new Azure Cosmos DB with SQL API.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1.  Prepare the MongoDB database
2.  Download the Data Migration tool
3.  Import data from the MongoDB database to you Cosmos DB database

#### Task 1: Prepare the MongoDB database

1.  Open a command prompt, and run the following command:

    ```DOS
    C:\Program Files\MongoDB\Server\3.6\bin\mongo.exe"
    ```
3.  At the MongoDB shell, run the following commands:

    ```
    use SalesData;
    db.createUser(
        {
        user: "salesadmin",
        pwd: "Pa55w.rd",
        roles: [ { role: "readWrite", db: "SalesData" } ]
        }
    );
    use admin;
    db.shutdownServer();
    exit;
    ```
4.  Restart the MongoDB by using `net start mongodb`.
5.  Back in the command window, connect to the database with the new salesadmin credentials using the following command:

    ```DOS
    "C:\Program Files\MongoDB\Server\3.6\bin\mongo.exe" -u "salesadmin" -p "Pa55w.rd" --authenticationDatabase "SalesData"
    ```
6.  At the MongoDB shell, run the following commands:

    ```
    use SalesData;
    db.testcollection.insert({testdata: 1});
    show collections;
    db.testcollection.find();
    exit;
    ```
7.  In the command window run the mongorestore command to import data for the task:
    
    ```DOS
    "C:\Program Files\MongoDB\Server\3.6\bin\mongorestore" -u "salesadmin" -p "Pa55w.rd" --db SalesData --collection customers  "Labfiles\Lab01\Setup\customers.bson"
    ```
8. Note that 407 customer documents have been imported.

### Task 2: Run the Data Migration tool

1.  Run the GUI version of the Data Migration tool **E:\\dmt\\bin\\dtui\\dtui.exe**.

### Task 3: Import data from the MongoDB database to you Cosmos DB database

1.  Use the Azure portal, navigate to the SalesData Cosmos DB database you created in exercise 1.
2.  On the **Keys** blade, copy the **PRIMARY CONNECTION STRING** to use in the migration tool.
3.  Use the Data Migration tool, set the source connection string to:

    ```
    mongodb://salesadmin:Pa55w.rd@localhost/SalesData
    ```
4.  Set the Collection to **customers**.
5.  For the target, set the target to **DocumentDB - Bulk import (single partition collections)** and use the copied **PRIMARY CONNECTION STRING** and append **database=SalesData**.
6.  Set the Collection to **customers**.
7.  Set the ID field to **\_id**. If you don't specify an ID, Cosmos DB has to generate a unique reference for each record. Specifying the ID therefore reduces the time to import the data.
8.  Return to the Azure portal, use the Data Explorer to return the total number of documents in the customers collection.

**Question**: How many documents are returned?

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
- Installed MongoDB and imported an existing MongoDB collection of documents.
- Installed the Data Migration tool.
- Migrated MongoDB data into an Azure Cosmos DB.
- Use the Data Explorer to view data in a documents database.

## Exercise 3: Access data by using the SQL API

### Scenario

To prove that the new Cosmos DB will be usable for your company, you have been asked to finish a simple menu-driven application that an intern started but didn't finish. It is designed to enable your sales team to query customer data.

The sales team have requested to be able to search for customers by either surname or the document id for the customer.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1.  Examine the existing .NET application.
2.  Configure the application to connect to Cosmos DB using the SQL API.
3.  Finish the code for the application.
4.  Test the application.

### Task 1: Examine the existing .NET application

1.  Using Visual Studio 2017, open the following solution:

    ```DOS
    Labfiles\Lab01\Starter\QueryCustomers\QueryCustomers.sln
    ```
2.  Examine the CustomerDetails.cs code. Note that there are two classes AddressInfo and CustomerInfo that represent the documents in the database.
3.  Examine the Program.cs code. Note there is a worker asynchronous DoWork method responsible for performing the queries and displaying the results.

### Task 2: Configure the application to connect to Cosmos DB using the SQL API

1.  Edit the app.config file, and set the EndpointUrl and PrimaryKey app settings to the URI and primary key for your Cosmos DB account (look in the Keys blade for the Cosmos DB account in the Azure portal).
2.  Using the NuGet Package Manager, add the Microsoft.Azure.DcumentDB.Core package to the solution. This package contains the libraries that implement the SQL API. Allow the NuGet Package Manager to install all the dependencies that it requires.

### Task 3: Finish the application

1.  In the Worker.DoWork method create a DocumentClient object connecting with a Uri object.
2.  In the FindCustomerByDocumentID method, use the CreateDocumentUri to build a unique Uri to a document with the given id.
3.  Add a call to the ReadDocumentAsync using the created Uri.
4.  Write the returned document to the console.
5.  Add the following code to return a document by last name to the FindCustomerByLastName method.

    ```C#
    string queryString = $"SELECT * FROM {this.collection} c WHERE c.lastname = @lastname";
    SqlParameterCollection parameters = new SqlParameterCollection()
    {
        new SqlParameter("@lastname", lastName)
    };

    SqlQuerySpec querySpec = new SqlQuerySpec()
    {
        QueryText = queryString,
        Parameters = parameters
    };
    ```
6.  You will be creating a Uri for a collection instead of document, and will need to loop through the returned results using this code.

    ```C#
    Uri collectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(this.database, this.collection);
    var query = this.client.CreateDocumentQuery<CustomerInfo>(collectionUri, querySpec);
    ```
7.  Loop through the results in query and write the documents to the console.

### Task 4: Test the application

1.  Build the application and fix any compiler errors.
2.  Run the application.
3.  Test returning a document by an id.

> Hint: Use the Data Explorer to find an existing document\`.

**Question:** What happens if you use an id that doesn't exist?

4.  Test returning documents by surname.
5.  Close the application when finished.

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
-  Examined the C\# code for an existing .NET application.
-  Configured an application to connect to Cosmos DB using the SQL API.
-  Finished the code for the application.
-  Tested the application.

## Exercise 4: Protect data in a Cosmos DB database

### Scenario

Know that you have tested your application you are ready to release it to the sales team. Before you do you have been asked to restrict certain users of the application access so that they can only read data. You need to remove the master key from the client application and create tokens to grant users specific access to the data.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:

1.  Set permissions for users.
2.  Configure and run the user creation application.
3.  Create a middle tier application to authenticate users and generate resource tokens.
4.  Build a client application to test this middle tier web API.
5.  Close down the resources to save azure costs.

#### Task 1: Set permissions for users

1.  Using Visual Studio open the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01\\Starter\\EnrollClient\\EnrollClient.sln** solution.
2.  Examine the **Main** method in the **Program.cs** file. This method prompts the user to provide a username, password, and permission either read only or all access.
3.  The **CreateUser** method inside the **UserEnroller** class creates the user on the **SalesData** database and stores the username and password in **SecurityData** database.
4.  The **VerifyUser** method displays the permissions granted to a specified user.

> **Important**: This is a rather simplistic approach to authentication. In a production environment passwords should be hashed and encrypted.

5.  After the `TODO: Connect to the Cosmos DB account` add the following code:

    ```C#
    DocumentClient client = new DocumentClient(new Uri(endpointUrl), primaryKey);
    ```
6.  After the comment `TODO: Check whether the user already exists`, add the following code. This code queries the `users` list for the database to determine whether a user that matches the `userName` parameter passed to the `CreateUser` method already exists:

    ```C#
    Uri usersUri = new Uri($"dbs/{database}/users", UriKind.Relative);
    string query = "SELECT * FROM u WHERE u.id = @id";
    SqlParameter param = new SqlParameter("@id", userName);
    SqlQuerySpec querySpec = new SqlQuerySpec(query, new SqlParameterCollection() { param });
    var existingUserQuery = client.CreateUserQuery(usersUri, querySpec);
    var result = existingUserQuery.ToList();
    ```
7.  After the comment `TODO: If the user doesn't exist, then create it`, add the following statements. This code creates a user with the specified user name.

    ```C#
    User databaseUser = new User
    {
        Id = userName
    };
    ```
8.  After the comment `TODO: Record the user's name and password in the security database (used for authenticating the user when they log in)`, add the following statements. This code adds a document containing the user name and password to the **SecurityData** database:

    ```C#
    Uri securityCollectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(securityDatabase, securityCollection);
    UserData userData = new UserData
    {
        UserName = userName,
        Password = password
    };
    ```
9.  After the comment `TODO: Set the user's permission on the specified database and collection`, add the following code. These statements create a new **Permission** object specifying the privilege assigned to the user over the collection. The call to the **VerifyUser** method should display the permission that has just been assigned:

    ```C#
    Permission collectionPermission = new Permission
    {
        PermissionMode = permission == 'A' ? PermissionMode.All : PermissionMode.Read,
        ResourceLink = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(database, collection).ToString(),
        Id = $"{userName}-{permission}"
    };
    ```

#### Task 2: Configure and run the application

1.  Using the Azure portal, go to the **Data Explorer** of the Cosmos DB you created in exercise 1.
2.  Create a new database named **SecurityData** and add a collection named **Passwords**.
3.  If you haven't already saved the **URI** and **PRIMARY KEYS**, copy them from the **Keys** section in the left pane.
4.  Add the copied data to the **App.config**, then build and run the application.
5.  Create a user and password with all access.
6.  Create a user and password with read only access.
7.  Return to the **Data Explorer** and review the documents you have just created in the **SecurityData** database.

#### Task 3: Authenticate users and generate resource tokens

> Note: The middle tier is a .NET web application that provides an API
> to return resource tokens to authenticated users. These tokens will
> grant access to the **Customers** collection in the **SalesData**,
> with the permissions created for the user.

1.  Using Visual Studio open the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01\\Starter\\AuthenticateUsers\\AuthenticateUsers.sln** solution.
2.  The solution contains two projects:
    - **AuthenticationWebApi**, which implements authentication as described above.
    - **AuthenticatedCustomersClient**, which is a sample client app that uses resource tokens to connect to the Cosmos  DB account.

3.  In the **AuthenticateController** constructor, after the comment `TODO: Retrieve the usernames and passwords from the security database`, add the following code. These statements create a query that fetches every document (containing the username and password) from the **Passwords** collection in the **SecurityData** database.

    ```C#
    string securityDatabase = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["SecurityDatabase"];
    string securityCollection = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["SecurityCollection"];
    Uri securityCollectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(securityDatabase, securityCollection);
    var query = client.CreateDocumentQuery<UserData>(securityCollectionUri);
    ```
4.  After the comment `Populate the users Dictionary from the username/password database`, add the following code. These statements retrieve all of the security documents and cache them in a Dictionary collection named **users**:

    ```C#
    users = new Dictionary<string, string>(query.Count());
    foreach (var user in query)
    {
        users[user.UserName] = user.Password;
    }
    ```
5.  In the **Authenticate** method, after the comment `TODO: Get the resource token(s) from the permission feed in the database`, add the following statements. This code connects to the permission feed in the database to read all of the permissions assigned to users:

    ```C#
    string database = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Database"];
    string collection = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Collection"];
    var permissionsUri = UriFactory.CreateUserUri(database, userName);
    var permissions = await client.ReadPermissionFeedAsync(permissionsUri);
    ```
6.  After the comment `TODO: Find the resource token for the specified user`, add the following code. When the permission was created, the ID was given the value *\<username\>-\<permission\>* (for example **Fred-R**). These statements use the ID to find the permission that matches the username, and returns the resource token generated for this permission:

    ```C#
    Regex expression = new Regex($"{userName}-.");
    string resourceToken = null;
    foreach (var permission in permissions)
    {
        var matching = expression.Matches(permission.Id);
        if (matching.Count > 0)
        {
            resourceToken = permission.Token;
            return Ok(resourceToken); ;
        }
    }
    ```
7.  After the comment `TODO: If there was no token for the specified partition, then return HTTP status code 401 (Unauthorized)`, add the following statement:

    ```C#
    return Unauthorized();
    ```
8.  Edit the **Web.config file**. Set the **EndpointUrl** and **PrimaryKey** appsettings to match those of your Cosmos DB account.
9.  Save all the changes to files.

#### Task 4: Build a client application to test the web API

> Note: The AuthenticatedCustomersClient project uses the web API to
> authenticate a user, if successful it reads the resource token
> returned and connects to the Cosmos DB **Customers** collection.

1.  In the **Program.cs** file, in the **DoWork** method, after the
    `TODO: Use the Web API to authenticate the user and obtain a
    collection of security tokens` comment add the following code. These
    statements construct an HTTP Get request Authenticate method of the
    web API and send it to the web application. Note that you should
    replace the URI in the base address with the URL of your web
    application:

    ```C#
    HttpClient httpClient = new HttpClient();
    httpClient.BaseAddress = new Uri("http://localhost:50281/");
    httpClient.DefaultRequestHeaders.Accept.Clear();
    httpClient.DefaultRequestHeaders.Accept.Add(
        new MediaTypeWithQualityHeaderValue("application/json"));

    HttpResponseMessage response = await httpClient.GetAsync($"api/Authenticate?userName={userName}&password={password}");
    ```
2.  After the comment `TODO: If the user was successfully authenticated,
    retrieve the resource token from the response`, add the following
    statements. This code extracts the resource token from the body of
    the response.

    ```C#
    Stream tokenStream = await response.Content.ReadAsStreamAsync();
    StreamReader reader = new StreamReader(tokenStream);
    var token = await Task.Factory.StartNew(() => 
        JsonConvert.DeserializeObject<string>(reader.ReadToEnd()));
    ```
3.  After the comment `TODO: Connect to the Cosmos DB account using the
    resource token`, add the following statements. Note that you use the
    token retrieved in the previous step to connect to the Cosmos DB
    account, and not the master
    key:

    ```C#
    string endpointUrl = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["EndpointUrl"];
    DocumentClient client = new DocumentClient(new Uri(endpointUrl), token);
    ```
4.  After the comment `TODO: Read data from the collection`. Add the
    following statements. This code uses the techniques shown in
    previous exercises to fetch the customers data from the
    **Customers** collection:

    ```C#
    string database = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Database"];
    string collection = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Collection"];
    Uri collectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(database, collection);
    var query = client.CreateDocumentQuery<CustomerInfo>(collectionUri);

    foreach (var doc in query)
    {
        Console.WriteLine();
        Console.WriteLine($"{doc.ToString()}");
    }
    ```
5.  After the comment `TODO: Attempt to write to the collection`, add
    the following statements. This code creates a new **CustomerInfo**
    object and writes it to the **Customers** collection:

    ```C#
    CustomerInfo user = new CustomerInfo
    {
        CustomerID = new Random().Next(),
        FirstName = "Brand",
        MiddleName = "New",
        LastName = "Customer"
    };

    await client.CreateDocumentAsync(collectionUri, user);
    ```
6.  Edit the **App.config** file, and provide the URL of your Cosmos DB
    account in the **EndpointUrl** app setting.
7.  Build and run the solution. A web browser window will appear, and a
    console window.
8.  In the console window, enter your username and password when
    prompted. If you completed the previous tasks correctly, your
    account should have all access to the **Customers** collection. You
    should see a list of customers, and the new customer will be added
    successfully.
9.  In the console enter the user with the read only access, the list of
    customers should be returned, then an error message stating that the
    user has insufficient access rights to add a new document to the
    collection.

#### Task 5: Lab close down

1.  To reduce your costs delete the resource group containing your
    Cosmos DB databases.

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
  -  Set permissions for users.
  -  Configured, run, and created users with permissions.
  -  Created a middle tier application to authenticate users and
     generate resource tokens.
  -  Finished a client application that uses a web API to retrieve
     resource tokens.
  -  Closed down the resources to save on Azure costs.

---
© 2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode),
additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document
(including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are
**not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This
document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual
property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document
for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in
this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may
change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are
for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is
intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied,
with respect to the information provided here.
