# Lab Answer Key: Module 1: Introduction to Azure Cosmos DB

- [Lab Answer Key: Module 1: Introduction to Azure Cosmos DB](#lab-answer-key-module-1-introduction-to-azure-cosmos-db)
    - [Lab: Introduction to Azure Cosmos DB](#lab-introduction-to-azure-cosmos-db)
        - [Exercise 1: Create an Azure Cosmos DB database with a SQL API](#exercise-1-create-an-azure-cosmos-db-database-with-a-sql-api)
            - [Task 0: Prepare the environment](#task-0-prepare-the-environment)
            - [Task 1: Create a document database using the Cosmos DB SQL API](#task-1-create-a-document-database-using-the-cosmos-db-sql-api)
            - [Task 2: Add customer documents to a collection](#task-2-add-customer-documents-to-a-collection)
            - [Task 3: Perform SQL queries](#task-3-perform-sql-queries)
            - [Task 4: Configure a documents lifetime](#task-4-configure-a-documents-lifetime)
            - [Task 5: Replicate the Cosmos DB Account across regions](#task-5-replicate-the-cosmos-db-account-across-regions)
        - [Exercise 2: Migrate data from an existing Mongo DB database to Cosmos DB](#exercise-2-migrate-data-from-an-existing-mongo-db-database-to-cosmos-db)
            - [Task 1: Prepare the MongoDB database](#task-1-prepare-the-mongodb-database)
            - [Task 2: Run the DocumentDB Data Migration Tool](#task-2-run-the-documentdb-data-migration-tool)
            - [Task 3: Import data from the MongoDB database to you Cosmos DB database](#task-3-import-data-from-the-mongodb-database-to-you-cosmos-db-database)
        - [Exercise 3: Access data by using the SQL API](#exercise-3-access-data-by-using-the-sql-api)
            - [Task 1: Examine the existing .NET application](#task-1-examine-the-existing-net-application)
            - [Task 2: Configure the application to connect to Cosmos DB using the SQL API](#task-2-configure-the-application-to-connect-to-cosmos-db-using-the-sql-api)
            - [Task 3: Finish the application](#task-3-finish-the-application)
            - [Task 4: Test the application](#task-4-test-the-application)
        - [Exercise 4: Protect data in a Cosmos DB database](#exercise-4-protect-data-in-a-cosmos-db-database)
            - [Task 1: Set permissions for users](#task-1-set-permissions-for-users)
            - [Task 2: Configure and run the application](#task-2-configure-and-run-the-application)
            - [Task 3: Authenticate users and generate resource tokens](#task-3-authenticate-users-and-generate-resource-tokens)
            - [Task 4: Build a client application to test the web API](#task-4-build-a-client-application-to-test-the-web-api)
            - [Task 5: Lab close down](#task-5-lab-close-down)

## Lab: Introduction to Azure Cosmos DB

### Exercise 1: Create an Azure Cosmos DB database with a SQL API

#### Task 0: Prepare the environment

1. Ensure that the **MT17B-WS2016-NAT** and **20777A-LON-DEV** virtual machines are running, and then log on to **20777A-LON-DEV** as **Administrator** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2. In File Explorer, go to **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01**, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.
3. Wait until the script has completed, and then press Enter.

#### Task 1: Create a document database using the Cosmos DB SQL API

1. On the toolbar, click **Internet Explorer**.
2. In the address bar, type **http://portal.azure.com**, and then press Enter.
3. Login with your Azure pass credentials.
4. In the left pane, click **Azure Cosmos DB**.
5. On the **Azure Cosmos DB** blade, click **+ Add**.
6. On the **Azure Cosmos DB** blade, in the **ID** box, type **20777a-mod1-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>**, for example **20777a-mod01-modsql-sam-12**.
7. In the **API** drop-down list, click **SQL**.
8. Under **Resource Group**, click **Create new**, and then type **20777aLab1**.
9. In the **Location** drop-down list, click the region closest to your current location.
10. Select the **Pin to dashboard** check box, and then click **Create**.
11. Wait for the Azure Cosmos DB to be created—this might take a few minutes.
12. On the **Azure Cosmos DB** blade, **Refresh**, and then click **20777a-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>**.
13. On the **20777a-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>** blade, click **Data Explorer**, and then click **New Database**.
14. In the **New Database** pane, in the **Database id** box, type **SalesData**, and then click **OK**.
15. On the **Data Explorer** blade, click **New Collection**.
16. In the **Add collection** pane, under **Database id**, click **Use existing**.
17. In the **Choose an existing database** drop-down list, click **SalesData**.
18. In the **Collection Id** box, type **Customers**.
19. In the **Throughput** box, change **1000** to **5000**.
20. Under **Unique keys**, click **+ Add unique key**.
21. In the text box, type **/customerid**, and then click **OK**.

#### Task 2: Add customer documents to a collection

1. In the **SQL API** pane, under **SalesData**, expand **Customers**, and then click **Documents**.
2. On the **Documents** tab, click **New Document**.
3. Replace the default document text:

    ```JSON
    {
        "id": "replace_with_new_document_id"
    }
    ```
    with this new document:
    ```JSON
    {
        "id": "1",
        "customerid": 101,
        "firstname": "Orlando",
        "lastname": "Gee",
        "email": "orlando.gee@adventure-works.com",
        "addresses": [
            { "addressline1" : "660 Lindbergh", "city" : "Saint Louis", "stateprovince" : "Missouri", "countryregion" : "United States", "postalcode" : "63103" },
            { "addressline1" : "Ontario Mills", "city" : "Ontario", "stateprovince" : "California", "countryregion" : "United States", "postalcode" : "91764" }
        ]
    }
    ```
4. On the **Documents** tab, click **Save**.
5. Repeat steps 2 to 4 with these documents:

    ```JSON
    {
        "id": "2",
        "customerid" : 122,
        "title" : "Ms.",
        "firstname" : "Caroline",
        "middlename" : "A.",
        "lastname" : "Vicknair",
        "companyname" : "World of Bikes",
        "salesperson" : "adventure-works\\jillian0",
        "addresses": [
            { "addressline1" : "72540 Blanco Rd.", "addressline2" : "South Side", "city" : "San Antonio", "stateprovince" : "Texas", "countryregion" : "United States", "postalcode" : "78204" }
        ]
    }
    ```
	and:
    ```JSON
    {
        "id": "3",
        "customerid": 108,
        "title" : "Mr.",
        "firstname" : "Robert",
        "middlename" : "R.",
        "lastname" : "Vessa",
        "suffix" : "Esq.",
        "companyname" : "Totes & Baskets Company",
        "salesperson" : "adventure-works\\jillian0",
        "emailaddress" : "robert13@adventure-works.com",
        "phone" : "560-555-0171"
    }
    ```
**Question**: Try and add another document with the customerid field set to 108, and id filed set to 4. What happens?

**Answer**: The Azure portal will display a dialogue: 
```
Unique index constraint violation.
```

#### Task 3: Perform SQL queries

1. On the **Data Explorer** blade, click **New SQL Query**.
2. On the **Query 1** tab, note the SQL query that has been pre-populated, and then click **Execute Query**:

    ```SQL
    SELECT * FROM c
    ```
3. Replace the above query with the following code, and then click **Execute Query**.

    ```SQL
     SELECT c.firstname, c.lastname, c.email FROM c
    ```
**Question**: As a document database is schema-less, what is returned in the customers JSON document that do not have an `email` property?

**Answer**: Customers without the specified property do not return any data. So in the above example only the first customer has returned an email address. The next two customers only return firstname and lastname.

4. Replace the above query with the following code, and then click **Execute Query**.

    ```SQL
    SELECT c.Customerid FROM c
    ```
**Question**: Why does this query return empty data? (**Hint:** field names are case sensitive)

**Answer**: The query returns three empty documents, because none of the documents have a Customerid attribute. They all have a customerid attribute though. Azure Cosmos DB cannot perform syntax checking on what you might think of as columns, as a document database is schema-less.

5. Replace the above query with the following code, and then click **Execute Query**.

    ```SQL
    SELECT c.addresses FROM c
    ```
**Question**: Explain the format of the documents returned by this query.

**Answer**: The first customer has two addresses, the second customer has one address, and the third customer has no addresses (displayed as an empty document {})

6. Replace the above query with the following code, and then click **Execute Query**.

    ```SQL
    SELECT c.customerid, c.city FROM c
    ```
**Question**: What might you have been expecting this query to return, and why didn't it work?

**Answer**: You probably expected it to return the customerid and city for each customer, but it only displayed the customerid. This is because city is not a field in the main part of the documents - it is in the addresses sub-documents array?

**Question**: How would you display the customerid and city for each customer? Is this correct?

```SQL
SELECT c.customerid, c.addresses.city FROM c
```

**Answer**: No, the correct answer is the following code, why?

```SQL
SELECT c.customerid, c.addresses[0].city FROM c
```

> Note: that addresses is an array, so you must use an array index to access sub-documents in the array (in this case, element 0 is the first sub-document). If you want to find data from all sub-documents in an array, you can use the JOIN operator, covered in more detail in module 2. If you are interested, rewrite the query as below, and execute it:

```SQL
SELECT c.customerid, a.city
FROM c
JOIN a IN c.addresses
```
#### Task 4: Configure a documents lifetime

1. In the **SQL API** pane, under **Documents**, click **Scale & Settings**.
2. On the **Scale & Settings** tab, under **Time to Live**, click **On**.
3. In the **second(s)** box, type **10**, and then click **Save**.
4. In the **SQL API** pane, click **Documents**.
5. Under the **Edit Filter** button, click the **Refresh** button.

> Note: all the previous documents have been deleted.

6. In the **SQL API** pane, under **Documents**, click **Scale & Settings**.
7. On the **Scale & Settings** tab, under **Time to Live**, click **Off**, and then click **Save**.

#### Task 5: Replicate the Cosmos DB Account across regions

1. On the **Data Explorer** blade, under **SETTINGS**, click **Replicate data globally**.
2. On the **Replicate data globally** blade, on the map, click on a hexagon containing a **+** near your current location.
3. On the map, click on a hexagon containing a **+** in another continent from your current location, and then click **Save**.

> Note: that the added regions are shown at the bottom of the page as **READ REGIONS**. It may take a few minutes (up to a maximum of 30 minutes), to spin up a new region. The Azure portal will notify you when the regions become available.

4. When the regions have been added, click **Automatic Failover**.
5. On the **Automatic Failover** blade, click **ON**.
6. Mouse over one of the added regions, click and hold on the three dot drag handle, move the region to a different position and note the change in priority, and then click **OK**.
7. On the **Replicate data globally** blade, click **Save**.
8. On the **Replicate data globally** blade, click **Manual Failover**.
9. In the **Manual Failover** blade, click a read region.
10. Select the **I understand and agree to trigger a failover on my current Write Region** check box, and then click **OK**.
11. Leave Internet Explorer open for future
tasks.

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
-  Created an Azure Cosmos DB database with a SQL API.
-  Added documents to a document database.
-  Performed a number of queries against the database.
-  Configured documents Time to Live value.
-  Replicated your databases data globally.

### Exercise 2: Migrate data from an existing Mongo DB database to Cosmos DB

#### Task 1: Prepare the MongoDB database

1. On the Start menu, type **cmd**, and then press Enter.
2. At the command prompt, type the following, and then press Enter:

    ```DOS
    E:
    cd MongoDB\bin
    mongo.exe
    ```
3. At the MongoDB shell prompt `>`, type the following commands:

    ```DOS
    use SalesData;
    db.createUser(
    {
        user: "salesadmin",
        pwd: "Pa55w.rd",
        roles: [ { role: "readWrite", db: "SalesData" } ]
    }
    );
    use admin;
    db.shutdownServer();
    exit;
    ```
4. At the command prompt, type the following command to restart the MongoDB, and then press Enter:

    ```DOS
    net start mongodb
    ```
5. At the command prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:

    ```DOS
    mongo.exe -u "salesadmin" -p "Pa55w.rd" --authenticationDatabase "SalesData"
    ```
6. At the MongoDB shell prompt `>`, type the following commands, and then press Enter:

    ```
    use SalesData;
    db.testcollection.insert({testdata: 1});
    show collections;
    db.testcollection.find();
    exit;
    ```
7. Note that the test data has been found.
8. At the command prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:

    ```DOS
    mongorestore -u "salesadmin" -p "Pa55w.rd" --db SalesData --collection customers  "E:\Labfiles\Lab01\Setup\customers.bson"
    ```
9.  You should see diagnostics that include the following line:

    ```DOS
    finished restoring SalesData.customers (407 documents)
    ```

#### Task 2: Run the DocumentDB Data Migration Tool

1. In File Explorer, go to **E:\\dmt\\bin\\dtui**, and then double-click **dtui.exe**.
2. Leave the application running for the next task.

#### Task 3: Import data from the MongoDB database to you Cosmos DB database

1. In Internet Explorer, in the left pane, click **Azure Cosmos DB**, and then click **20777a-mod1-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>** (the SQL API database you created in exercise 1).
2. On the **20777a-mod1-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>** blade, under **SETTINGS**, click **Keys**.
3. Make a note of the **PRIMARY CONNECTION STRING** value.
4. In the **DocumentDB Data Migration Tool** window, on the **Welcome** page, click **Next**.
5. On the **Source** **Information** page, in the **Import from** drop-down list, click **MongoDB**.
6. In the **Connection String** box, type the following, and then click **Verify**:

    ```
    mongodb://salesadmin:Pa55w.rd@localhost/SalesData
    ```
7. In the **Verify Connection** dialog box, click **OK**.
8. In the **Collection** box, type **customers**, and then click
    **Next**.
9. On the **Target** **Information** page, in the **Connection String** box, enter the copied **PRIMARY CONNECTION STRING**.
10. At the end of the string, add **database=SalesData**.
11. In the **Collection** box, type **Customers**.
12. In the **Id Field** box, type **\_id**, and then click **Next**.
13. On the **Advanced** page, click **Next**.
14. On the **Summary** page, click **Import**. It may take around 30 seconds.

**Question**: How many documents are transfered?

**Answer**: 407 documents

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
- Installed MongoDB and imported an existing MongoDB collection ofdocuments.
- Installed the DocumentDB Data Migration Tool.
- Migrated MongoDB data into an Azure Cosmos DB.
- Use the Data Explorer to view data in a documents database.

### Exercise 3: Access data by using the SQL API

#### Task 1: Examine the existing .NET application

1. On the Start menu, click **Visual Studio** **2017**.
2. In Visual Studio 2017, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, go to **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01\\Starter\\QueryCustomers**, click **QueryCustomers.sln**, and then click **Open**.
4. In Solution Explorer, double-click **CustomerDetails.cs**.
5. Note that there are two classes **AddressInfo** and **CustomerInfo** that represent the documents in the database.
6. In Solution Explorer, double-click **Program.cs**.
7. Note the **Main** method uses the asynchronous **DoWork** method to perform the queries and display the results.

#### Task 2: Configure the application to connect to Cosmos DB using the SQL API

1. In Visual Studio 2017, on the **View** menu, click **Cloud Explorer**.
2. In the **Cloud Explorer** pane, at the top click the **Account Management** button.
3. If your Azure pass is not listed as an account, click **Manage Accounts**.
4. In the **Sign in to Visual Studio** window, click **Add an account**.
5. In the **Sign into your account** dialog box, enter your Azure username and password, and then click **Sign in**.
6. In the **Sign in to Visual Studio** window, click **Close**.
7. In the **Cloud Explorer** pane, click **Apply**.
8. Under your Azure account, expand **Cosmos DB Accounts**, and then click the **20777a-mod1-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>** database created early.
9. At the bottom of the **Cloud Explorer** pane, click the **Properties** tab.
10. Make a note of the **Document** **Endpoint**, and **Primary Master Key** values.
11. In Solution Explorer, double-click **App.config**.
12. In App.config, in the **value** attribute of the **EndpointUrl** key, paste the **Document Endpoint** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter URI here**.
13. In the **value** attribute of the **PrimaryKey** key, paste the **Primary Master Key** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter Primary Key here**.
 
#### Task 3: Finish the application

1. In Solution Explorer, double-click **Program.cs**.
2. Under the **// TODO: Connect to the Cosmos DB database** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    this.client = new DocumentClient(new Uri(endpointUrl), primaryKey);
	```
3. In the **FindCustomerDocumentByID** method, under the **// TODO: Construct the URI for this document** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    Uri docUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentUri(this.database, this.collection, id);
	```
4. Under the **// TODO: Fetch the document** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    var documentResponse = await client.ReadDocumentAsync<CustomerInfo>(docUri);
	```
5. Under the **// TODO: Display the contents of the document** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    Console.WriteLine(documentResponse.Document);
    Console.WriteLine();
	```
6. Under the **// TODO: Construct a query to find matching customers** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    string queryString = $"SELECT * FROM {this.collection} c WHERE c.lastname = @lastname";
    SqlParameterCollection parameters = new SqlParameterCollection()
    {
        new SqlParameter("@lastname", lastName)
    };
    
    SqlQuerySpec querySpec = new SqlQuerySpec()
    {
        QueryText = queryString,
        Parameters = parameters
    };
	```
7. Under the **// TODO: Specify the collection to run the query against** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    Uri collectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(this.database, this.collection);
    var query = this.client.CreateDocumentQuery<CustomerInfo>(collectionUri, querySpec);
	```
8.  Under the **// TODO: Run the query, and display the list of matching
    customers** comment, type the following code:
	
    ```C#
    foreach (var doc in query)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"{doc.ToString()}");
    }
	```
#### Task 4: Test the application

1. In the **Cloud Explorer** pane, under your Azure account, expand **Cosmos DB Accounts**, expand **20777a-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>**, expand **SalesData**, expand **Customers**, and then click on a document.
2. On the **Actions** tab, click **Open**.
3. In the opened document, copy the value next to the **id**.
4. Press F5 to build and run the application.
5. If there are any complier errors correct them.
6. Type **a**, paste the copied document id from step 3, and then press Enter.
7. Note the document is returned.
8. Type **a**, type a random number, and then press Enter.

**Question:** What happens if you use an id that doesn't exist?

**Answer:** An error is returned:

```JSON
{"Errors":["Resource Not Found"]}
```

9. Type **b**, type **Gee**, and then press Enter.
10. Note that a document is returned.
11. Type **b**, type a random surname, and then press Enter.

**Question:** What happens if you use a surname that doesn't exist?

**Answer:** Nothing is returned. This isn't an error condition as the
code can handle 0 to many matches on surname. However, by using the
UriFactory.CreateDocumentUri method it expects a valid Id. This errors
when it tries to generate the URI.

12. Type **x** to close the application.
13. On the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.
14. Leave Visual Studio open for the next exercise.

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
-  Examined the C\# code for an existing .NET application.
-  Configured an application to connect to Cosmos DB using the SQL API.
-  Finished the code for the application.
-  Tested the application.

### Exercise 4: Protect data in a Cosmos DB database

#### Task 1: Set permissions for users

1. In Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then  click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, go to **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01\\Starter\\EnrollClient**, click  **EnrollClient.sln**, and then click **Open**.  
3. In Solution Explorer, double-click **Program.cs**.
4. In Program.cs, examine the **Main** method. This method prompts the user to provide a username, password, and permission either read only or all access.
5. In Solution Explorer, double-click **UserEnroller.cs**.
6. In UserEnroller.cs, the **CreateUser** method inside the **UserEnroller** class creates the user on the **SalesData** database and stores the username and password in **SecurityData** database. The **VerifyUser** method displays the permissions granted to a specified user.
7. In the **CreateUser** method, under the comment **// TODO: Connect to the Cosmos DB account**, type the followin code:

    ```C#
    DocumentClient client = new DocumentClient(new Uri(endpointUrl), primaryKey);
    ```
8. Under the comment **// TODO: Check whether the user already exists**, type the following code:

    ```C#  
    Uri usersUri = new Uri($"dbs/{database}/users", UriKind.Relative);
    string query = "SELECT * FROM u WHERE u.id = @id";
    SqlParameter param = new SqlParameter("@id", userName);
    SqlQuerySpec querySpec = new SqlQuerySpec(query, new SqlParameterCollection() { param });
    var existingUserQuery = client.CreateUserQuery(usersUri, querySpec);
    var result = existingUserQuery.ToList();
    ```

9. Under the comment **// TODO: If the user doesn't exist, then create it**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    User databaseUser = new User
    {
        Id = userName
    };
    ```
10. Under the comment **// TODO: Record the user's name and password in the security database (used for authenticating the user when they log in)**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    Uri securityCollectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(securityDatabase, securityCollection);
    UserData userData = new UserData
    {
        UserName = userName,
        Password = password
    };
    ```
11. Under the comment **// TODO: Set the user's permission on the
    specified database and collection**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    Permission collectionPermission = new Permission
    {
        PermissionMode = permission == 'A' ? PermissionMode.All : PermissionMode.Read,
        ResourceLink = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(database, collection).ToString(),
        Id = $"{userName}-{permission}"
    };
    ```
#### Task 2: Configure and run the application

1. In Internet Explorer, on the **20777a-mod1-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>** blade , click **Data Explorer**, and then click **New  Database**.
2. In the **New Database** blade, under **Database id**, type
    **SecurityData**, and then click **OK**.
3. Right-click **SecurityData**, and then click **New Collection**.
4. Under the **Collection Id**, type **Passwords**, and then click **OK**.
5. In Visual Studio, in Cloud Explorer, click **Refresh All**.
6. In Solution Explorer, double-click **App.config**.
7. In App.config, in the **Value** attribute of the **EndpointUrl** key, paste the **URI** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter URI here**.
8. In the **Value** attribute of the **PrimaryKey** key, paste the **Primary Master Key** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter Primary Key here**.
9. Press F5 to build and run the solution.
10. At the command prompt, after **User name:**, type **admin**, and then press Enter.
11. At the command prompt, after **Password:**, type **adm1n**, and then press Enter.
12. At the command prompt, after **Permission R(ead)/A(ll):**, type **A**.
13. At the command prompt, after **Press q to quit, any other key to add a new user**, press Enter.
14. At the command prompt, after **User name:**, type **test**, and then press Enter. 
15. At the command prompt, after **Password:**, type **t3st**, and then press Enter.
16. At the command prompt, after **Permission R(ead)/A(ll):**, type **R**.
17. At the command prompt, type **q**.
18. On the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.
19. In Internet Explorer, on the **20777a-mod1-sql-\<your name\>-\<the day\>** blade, click **Data Explorer**.
20. In the **SQL API** pane, expand **SecurityData**, expand **Passwords**, and then click **Documents**.
21. On the **Documents** tab, click any of the **ids** to see the documents contents.

#### Task 3: Authenticate users and generate resource tokens
1. In Visual Studio, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, go to **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab01\\Starter\\AuthenticateUsers**, click **AuthenticateUsers.sln**, and then click **Open**.
3. The solution contains two projects:
    - **AuthenticationWebApi**, which implements authentication as described above.
    - **AuthenticatedCustomersClient**, which is a sample client app that uses resource tokens to connect to the Cosmos DB account.
4. In Solution Explorer, expand **AuthenticationWebApi**, expand **Controllers**, and then double-click **AuthenticateController.cs**.
5. In the **AuthenticateController** constructor, under the comment **// TODO: Retrieve the usernames and passwords from the security database**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    string securityDatabase = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["SecurityDatabase"];
    string securityCollection = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["SecurityCollection"];
    Uri securityCollectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(securityDatabase, securityCollection);
    var query = client.CreateDocumentQuery<UserData>(securityCollectionUri);
    ```
6. Under the comment **// TODO: Populate the users Dictionary from the username/password database**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    users = new Dictionary<string, string>(query.Count());
    foreach (var user in query)
    {
        users[user.UserName] = user.Password;
    }
    ```
7. In the **Authenticate** method, under the comment **// TODO: Get the resource token(s) from the permission feed in the database**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    string database = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Database"];
    string collection = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Collection"];
    var permissionsUri = UriFactory.CreateUserUri(database, userName);
    var permissions = await client.ReadPermissionFeedAsync(permissionsUri);
    ```
8. Under the comment **// TODO: Find the resource token for the specified user**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    Regex expression = new Regex($"{userName}-.");
    string resourceToken = null;
    foreach (var permission in permissions)
    {
        var matching = expression.Matches(permission.Id);
        if (matching.Count > 0)
        {
            resourceToken = permission.Token;
            return Ok(resourceToken); ;
        }
    }
    ```
9. Under the comment **// TODO: If there was no token for the specified partition, then return HTTP status code 401 (Unauthorized)**, type the following code:

    ```C#
    return Unauthorized();
    ```
10. In Solution Explorer, double-click **Web.config**.
11. In Web.config, in the **Value** attribute of the **EndpointUrl** key, paste the **URI** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter URI here**.
12. In the **Value** attribute of the **PrimaryKey** key, paste the **Primary Master Key** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter Primary Key here**. 
13. On the **File** menu, click **Save All**.

#### Task 4: Build a client application to test the web API

1. In Solution Explorer, under **AuthenticatedCustomersClient**, double-click **Program.cs**.
2. In Program.cs, in the **DoWork** method, under the comment **// TODO: Use the Web API to authenticate the user and obtain a collection of security tokens**, type add the following code:

    ```C#
    HttpClient httpClient = new HttpClient();
    httpClient.BaseAddress = new Uri("http://localhost:50281/");
    httpClient.DefaultRequestHeaders.Accept.Clear();
    httpClient.DefaultRequestHeaders.Accept.Add(
        new MediaTypeWithQualityHeaderValue("application/json"));

    HttpResponseMessage response = await httpClient.GetAsync($"api/Authenticate?userName={userName}&password={password}");
    ```

3. Under the comment **// TODO: If the user was successfully authenticated, retrieve the resource token from the response**, type add the following code:

    ```C#
    Stream tokenStream = await response.Content.ReadAsStreamAsync();
    StreamReader reader = new StreamReader(tokenStream);
    var token = await Task.Factory.StartNew(() => 
        JsonConvert.DeserializeObject<string>(reader.ReadToEnd()));    
    ```
4. Under the comment **// TODO: Connect to the Cosmos DB account using the resource token**, type add the following code:

    ```C#
    string endpointUrl = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["EndpointUrl"];
    DocumentClient client = new DocumentClient(new Uri(endpointUrl), token);
    ```
5. Under the comment **// TODO: Read data from the collection**, type add the following code:

    ```C#
    string database = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Database"];
    string collection = ConfigurationManager.AppSettings["Collection"];
    Uri collectionUri = UriFactory.CreateDocumentCollectionUri(database, collection);
    var query = client.CreateDocumentQuery<CustomerInfo>(collectionUri);
    
    foreach (var doc in query)
    {
        Console.WriteLine();
        Console.WriteLine($"{doc.ToString()}");
    }
    ```
6. After the comment **// TODO: Attempt to write to the collection**, add the following statements. This code creates a new **CustomerInfo** object and writes it to the **Customers** collection:

    ```C#
    CustomerInfo user = new CustomerInfo
    {
        CustomerID = new Random().Next(),
        FirstName = "Brand",
        MiddleName = "New",
        LastName = "Customer"
    };
    
    await client.CreateDocumentAsync(collectionUri, user);
    ```
7. In Soultion Explorer, under **AuthenticatedCustomersClient**, double-click **App.config**.

8. In App.config, in the **Value** attribute of the **EndpointUrl** key, paste the **URI** value you noted earlier, replacing the text **enter URI here**.
9. Press F5 to build and run the solution.
10. A web browser window will appear, and a console window.
11. In the console window, under **User name**, type **admin**, and then press Enter.
12. In the console window, under **Password**, type **adm1n**, and then press Enter.
13. Note that the customers you added earlier are listed, and a new document has been added, and then p ress Enter.
14. In the console window, under **User name**, type **test**, and then  press Enter.
15. In the console window, under **Password**, type **t3st**, and then press Enter.
16. Note that the customers you added earlier plus the new empty one is listed. There is also an error, as the test user doesn't have the  permissions to write data to the database.
17. Press Enter to close the console window.
18. Close the Home Page, and then close Visual Studio.

#### Task 5: Lab close down

1. To reduce your costs delete the resource group containing your Cosmos DB databases.
2. In Internet Explorer, in the left pane, click **Resource groups**.
5. Right-click **20777aLab1**, and then click **Delete resource group**.
7. On the **Are you sure you want to delete "20777aLab1"?** blade, in the **Type the resource group name:** box, type **20777aLab1**, and then click **Delete**.

**Result**: At the end of this exercise, you will have:
-  Set permissions for users.
-  Configured, run, and created users with permissions.
-  Created a middle tier application to authenticate users and generate resource tokens.
-  Finished a client application that uses a web API to retrieve resource tokens.
-  Closed down the resources to save on Azure costs.

---
© 2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode),
additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document
(including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are
**not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This
document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual
property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document
for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in
this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may
change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are
for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is
intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied,
with respect to the information provided here.
